[00:07]
Calo Rosa, recepçao, senhor Delgado Rosa. En nou voor Portugese moet je op je eend en nou voor continueren om een Engels. Over de eend. Bij deze open ik het gesprek. Hierbij I would like to open this meeting on the evaluation and revision of the Nitraat directive with Mr. Umberto Delgado Rosa. Director for biodiversity, DG Environment of the European Commission. I warmly welcome Mr.

[00:35]
Umberto Delgado Rosa and his team and express my appreciation for their presence here today in the House of Representatives. Additionally, I would like to extend a warm welcome to the members of Parliament. Present are members from the committee and agriculture, fishery, food, security and nature.

[00:56]
Furthermore, I wish to highlight that the committee has appointed the members of parliament Meulekamp, Holman, further as a you rapporteurs regarding the revision and evaluation of the Nitrates directive. Lastly, I would like to extend my welcome to the audience in the gallery and those who are watching at home. This meeting is scheduled until 4:00.

[01:20]
Considering the presence of multiple members for political party, I propose that each member poses one question each. It's expected that there will be sufficient time for multiple rounds, so that all attendees have an opportunity to post their questions. I would now like to give the floor to Mr. Delgado Rosa. I would like to ask you to give a short introduction and provide a brief opening statement of about 10 minutes. The floor is for you.

[01:50]
Thank you, Mr. Chairman, members of the parliament. I'm really honored that you found relevant to have us here discussing with you after what was an interesting interview interaction some time ago with the reporters. And I'm also aware that some two months ago you had here an exchange with the Commissioner Roosevelt, the Commissioner for water resilience, environment, and the competitive circular economy. So, don't expect me to be bring so clear messages as the Commissioner. I'm actually not here to bring new messages.

[02:21]
This is a technical briefing, so I will try to enlighten you as much as as I can from the on this policy domain rather than politics domain which is not my field. But I would like to say the following and I don't say it to give you warm feelings as Dutch people you want, but I do find the Netherlands a very innovative entrepreneurship country with a lot of capacity to bring in efficiency and quite an agriculture powerhouse.

[02:50]
So in this sense I would like to just share some words on the policy context related to agriculture and food because you remember well the farmer protests, also in the Netherlands, also in Brussels that have come to be followed up by strategic dialogue on farming and food led in Brussels which amounted to a consensual report which was interesting to see. And from that last February, we had this vision for agriculture and food.

[03:19]
It came in February 2025 while it was underlined by the commission that farming and food are strategic sectors for the EU and they should be attractive, fair, sustainable, and competitive competitive. And also very importantly that farming should be resilient.

[03:39]
And one of the challenges that farming nowadays already faces is related to what some call the the triple plant theory crisis, climate change, by the vasilos pollution that's having an impact in in farming.

[03:54]
Um and specifically on nutrients, that's what I'm now do the link with the issue of nutrients and This vision emphasizes that we need to pay quite some attention on improving nutrients management at farm level, an increasing nutrient circularity, being circularity are relevant to political words. It also says that priority should be given to addressing nutrient pollution hotspots and promoting integrated territorial approaches.

[04:22]
So let's say one of the key aspects for this is the management of control and control of nutrients from livestock farming to limit externalities as they are called and also supporting extensification in regions where there are high livestock concentrations. Also with a view promoting circularity so as to avoid the use of synthetic fertilizers.

[04:47]
So this is pretty much on this angle a division for agriculture to which I would add the recently displayed European water resilience strategy that came on the 4th of June because actually we cannot no longer take water for granted in terms of quality of quantity as it affects citizens business and the environment.

[05:08]
And again, this water resilient strategy thus call for limiting the pollution by nutrients as a central action to restore water quality and which would also improve the implementation of the nitrates directive in all member states.

[05:24]
So in a nutshell, these key words of water resilience, circularity and let's say on farming, taking into account the ecosystems component going from incentives to from the impositions to incentives like payment of ecosystem services, finding solutions, cross-sectional solutions, and dialogue is pretty much in the policy context of nowadays. Now, to say a bit on the nitrates directive.

[05:53]
First, it's from 1991, and as you know, it aims to protect fresh surface and ground waters, as well as esturine and coastal waters against pollution due to the application of fertilizers and manure from livestock in agriculture. It does play quite a role on protecting drinking water resources as well as aquatic ecosystems. That's what it exists for.

[06:18]
It's also aims to, well, prevent the pollution, the nitrates pollution, and the eutrophication of water bodies. It is a directive that is fully linked integrated in the the wider water framework directive.

[06:33]
Actually, the measures of the nitrates directive are an important contributions to achieving good status for ground waters and good ecological status for surface surface waters by 2027, which is the the timing of the framework directive. Of course, the Natura directive also contributes to other environmental objectives.

[06:53]
We set biodegradation be good agricultural practices, the good environmental status of marine waters, ammonia reduction targets for air quality, the reduction of greenhouse gases, protection of soil, nature, biodiversity.

[07:08]
So, in a nutshell, the Natura directive sets, let's say, a common minimum standard for the the protection of waters allowing a lot of flexibility to wow the member states decide to apply that provided the goals of protection are attained. Now, with this said, I would enter a bit on the evaluation of the nitrates directive. And I wanted to share while the evaluation started 2024.

[07:36]
It's the first comprehensive evaluation of the directive. It has been, let's say, um It was looked into another horizontal evaluations um that happened notably the one on the Water Framework Directive, but it's the first time that we'll go in depth on what were the results obtained, what was the evolution of the national implementation since 1921.

[08:01]
Some specific aspects evaluation will pay attention to include well the interplay with the Water Framework Directive, with the Common Agricultural Policy, also the role and the scope of the directive within policies related to the management of nutrients from agriculture.

[08:19]
And very importantly, the cost of implementation for farmers, the cost of implementation for public authorities, the cost of nutrient pollution for society overall, and also the benefits that directive brings in on reducing those costs. So cost benefit will be a relevant part of it. And we will also look into the potential for simplification and the reduction of the burden for monitoring reporting.

[08:47]
So let's say since January 2024 to April 2025, we were largely investing on consultations beyond the standard public consultation. We had consultation with farmers associations, water companies, national authorities, academia, civil society, where we had workshops, expert groups, surveys, interviews. So we invested quite a lot in terms of of consultation.

[09:15]
We will finalize the evaluation by the end of 2025 and let me make make you make it very clear. There's no decision whatsoever on a review that will depend on the evaluation itself and it's bound for political decision. So at this stage there's no decision on an evaluation.

[09:35]
Maybe I should go in my introduction also sharing some words with you on a Dutch situation, the implementation in the Netherlands It's no surprise for you that the commission does have concerns about nutrient pollution from agriculture in the Netherlands which come from excess manure.

[09:56]
So we have situations of nitrates in non-water, eutrophication of coastal and freshwater, ammonia emissions, nature degradation, you are well aware with this. And of course this does pose threats to human health drinking water to resources to nature itself, but also many economic activities from the permitting angle and noticeably.

[10:19]
So, I don't have figures on the costs of the situation for the environment specifically, but to share a figure from 2013, then this will be updated in the evaluation. The The societal costs in the whole of the EU from nitrogen pollution from agriculture is huge. It was estimated by then between 35 and to to to um 230 billion per year. So, there are costs associated.

[10:47]
Uh, I think Commissioner Roesveld used an expression of a a nitrogen blanket that is standing upon the Netherlands and causing all these challenges Now, why is this so? Well, in terms of the facts is that you do have quite a specific situation on a amount of money versus the land available in the Netherlands. Just to share some figures.

[11:16]
The amounts are not only the highest in the EU, but they are also present in all agricultural regions. But if you want to have a bit of numbers on comparability, the total manual manual production in the Netherlands is around five times the EU average and three times higher than Germany and it's more than double of the third highest country on terms of manual quantity which is the Denmark.

[11:41]
So it's as I say rather specific situation you have that is causing these costs and also the challenges versus several directives we have.

[11:52]
You also probably aware of facts on water quality, which is the data do show that the share of groundwater stations that are polluted, meaning above this limit of the nitrate or active of 50 mg per liter has increased from 14 to 18% when we compare the period 2016, 2019 to the period 2020, 2023.

[12:17]
And in terms this is on groundwater and in terms of shallow groundwater, which is the one that reacts more quickly to impact so above it. The percentage went up from 30% to 40%. You do have a trophic irrigation of surface water with more than half. It's a major concern in more than half of the provinces. Coastal waters more than 85% of measuring points are trophic.

[12:43]
And many waters are not expected at all to reach the objectives of the water from the directive by 2027. So some 67% are not expected to reach good ecological status and that's primarily due to diffuse pollution from agriculture.

[13:03]
Um now in terms of implementation of the Natura 2000 it was it's also made clear including by judgments of the European Court that it does require a member states to take additional measures as soon as and I'm using the expression of the court it becomes clear that measures in place are not effective.

[13:25]
So, when we have a situation of non-effectiveness of measures, the sense of urgency kicks in as actions needed to deliver.

[13:34]
And as you also know, because there was including concerns that were expressed to the Dutch authorities and share with this parliament, the commission is concerned by the measures table to deal with nitrates and manure because reducing the level of protection of national implementation of nitrates directive on betting on lowering environmental standards somewhere in the future on the future doesn't look like a robust way for what to deal with what is a significant a significant crisis.

[14:07]
So of course we have taken note that there's a path for preparing a Nate's night to action program that was presented by the government. We note that some of the measures that worry us are still on the table.

[14:19]
We're also concerned about delays in taking action that can come from making rules ever more complex and which is an issue we understand for farmers by one way of course flexibility is good but at some point complexity increases the lack of clarity on the pathway to be taken.

[14:40]
On another hand key measures from the sevens nitrogen action program that has still been discussed and not implemented such as reviewing the fertilization rates or the transition to land-based dairy farming. So This is the main message I would like to share with you this is this need for actions that deliver urgent immediate reductions in excess manure and in excess nitrates.

[15:09]
Maybe Mr. Chairman, if you allow me and I may be taking a bit longer than you expected, but maybe I should add also something on the abattoir directive because of course there's an abattoir directive, the links with water framework, but pretty much what you face as an nitrogen crisis that as a link with the habitats are active, that we all know it's a directive at times to have samples of the most valuable habitats and species and have them protected there in the in the union.

[15:37]
And we are also concerned with the poor state of nature protected habitat and species in the Netherlands because currently we have around 78% of species and nearly 90% of habitats which are in unfavorable conservation status and there are declining populations of farmland birds which are protected and the birds are active and according to reports from the Dutch authorities some 26% of habitats protect under the directive are deteriorating while some 45 out of 52 protected habitats are sensitive to nitrogen.

[16:17]
So of course one can say well so the problem of nitrogen is the habitats directive but I would like to say that we don't think so the problem is that there was lack of action to avoid deterioration for quite a while and that's what has caused the situation if you have to ensure non-deterioration and the deterioration is ongoing Nitrogen being one of the issues.

[16:39]
Of course, any action that can bring more nitrogen becomes a stumbling block, which is my understanding that derived from Dutch court decision. So in other words, we feel that this nitrogen blanket needs to be a bit alleviated for nature to have its own space and then the projects that maybe styled can maybe go better.

[17:07]
Maybe I would I would stop by saying the following. The most the habitats are active and the nitrates are active and indeed in my view the action by the commission in support of the Netherlands has been full of flexibility. And this issue it's an issue that tackles many many aspects of the Dutch society. We are very convinced of the power of dialogue and whatever the solutions we won't come and preach them to you.

[17:35]
The Netherlands we know we'll know better what to do. But this element of dialogue and bog on stakeholders. Farmers, of course, but the wider society is we believe crucial for this. You We have seen for to give the example of Denmark, which also had quite a situation on items and manual, they reach an agreement. The three-party agreement and they won't need an derogation any longer.

[17:58]
I'm not saying you need to follow any Danish example and just convinced from having watched the dialogue on agriculture and farming that We don't need to have the same world views or the same hierarchy of values to reach consensus and fight always through and when you'll do it as the society you will become I'm sure a light house for Europe on how complex problems can be solved. Maybe I would stop here Mr. Chairman and pleased to hear your questions. Thank you very much. Mr. De Gardoza.

[18:29]
I will now give the floor to the present member of both committees and to react to the issues that are raised and I hope you can do it in English. So Mr. De Gardo can understand. First I give uh the floor to member Costigh from the party for the animals. Thank you very much. Thank you for coming here. Um it's interesting you're stating the poor status of nature and the quality of water in the Netherlands.

[18:58]
Um it's also good to know for you from you that this current government you mentioned the sense of urgency and taking actual measures. Uh Eh, that's kind of lost focused and the current government is focusing on eh weakening the rules eh and getting exemptions.

[19:16]
So I was mainly interested eh in what measures is the commission eh prepared to take against countries who are structurally not abiding to the rules of the directives. Eh, so what are eh the consequences after con con uh structurally not applying by the rules. Thank you, Mr. Nagada.

[19:45]
Well, the commission is simply the what we say the guardian of the treaties and of course we are here to ensure that your rules are followed. But um and we do have have had and have infringements open with other with other countries not with the Netherlands nowadays. So we follow very closely the situation and we aim very much to uh collaborate and finding solutions.

[20:09]
Actually, the current delegation was based on a set of decisions that were had been announced that should be put on place and that would allow in spite of the complicated water situation by then to to follow it to come out. So, we are not preaching as I said what should be done or not.

[20:28]
We just insist on the urgency of reducing the excess nitrates and nitrogen overall and otherwise we'll just keep following the situation analysing and acting also to ensure that the level playing field with the other member states, of course. Thank you. Mr. Nehof, the party for freedom. Thank you. you um chairman. Um, my um one yeah, I have more questions. I I start with one.

[20:58]
Uh, I agree the um the focus on the hotspot you told uh in the beginning. Um, but to bring some flexibility in uh all what we have to do here in Netherlands, I want to ask you if in a large part large part in in the country what objectives are well reached in uh is it possible to exclude those parts as a funeral area.

[21:25]
So get more flexibility in farmers and to get more progression. Well, in my understanding it was an option by the Netherlands to have the whole country approach as nitrates are vulnerable. And I can understand that some areas nowadays show worse situation than others.

[21:46]
But it's it would be worrying to to believe that by lowering the standards on non-polluted areas nowadays, that would help lead to something because the risk then is that they would the pollution would also increase there. So as uh it doesn't seem to us the the best approach and certainly not one that per se would solve anything. I mean, when there is excess manure, you it won't just fade away. It needs to be dealt in a way to to reduce it.

[22:16]
So that's up for decision of the the country, of the member state.

[22:24]
Thank you very much. Mr. Pierik, from Farmers Citizens Movement. Thanks, chairman. At first, short question, but our question which is very important for many farmers in the Netherlands. When we can expect more information about the possibilities to use a renewal for the Netherlands?

[22:47]
Well, we have tabled the proposal proposal for renewal, which is basically a proposal to allow the use of processed manure in some in certain circumstances as equivalent to chemical fertilizers. We have understand that was actually one request from the Netherlands that stable is being analyzed at the committee level with the other member states and we know not all member states are convinced yet.

[23:12]
So there's something still being debated because they had say the popularity of the approach is not evenly spread among Thank you, Mr. Holman. New social contract. Yeah, thank you. Thank you, Mr. Rosa. We talked before and I appreciated you for a good analyse and a clear speaking of what's the issue. You telling from we are not to to advise you.

[23:42]
You have to think yourself was the solution. But last time we are speaking about from uh special situation in Holland and we have a quite a lot of cattle and quite a lot of manure. Uh, do you have an opinion about the question from can we solve our problems with maintaining the same amount of manure in the same amount of cattle?

[24:08]
With losing the location, we have 30% more manure where we don't really know where to go with. How do you rate that and what What What What is your opinion about that? Well, you definitely have quite a lot of cattle around on the Netherlands as you've been using approaches on innovation technology etc.

[24:32]
Um so I won't be the one saying what you need to do but do you have better ideas on how to reduce quickly manure? That's the answer the question I would give back because indeed it's not for the commission to say what you have to do. Um there's an issue as I said on competitive We can go for another round. You have an additional question?

[25:03]
We can we can continue now.

[25:05]
So, because it's I was wondering about there obviously also some scientific doubts about renewal and I was wondering what the process is when uh obviously There needs to be a political support for a newer, but apart from that, obviously European Commission has already announced it needs to have a scientific basic basis that it needs to comply and be in line with all the other ambitions that we have on nature, environmental aspects, etc.

[25:37]
So, I was wondering, is there such a scientific basis? Is Are they going to be scientific interventions, researches? What's the planning of that? Let's there was already in terms of the joint research center that advises on scientifically as helped us establish what are the scientific conditions needed to ensure that renew can be applied without uh major differences versus chemical fertilizers.

[26:06]
There are risks of emissions of ammonia that will need to be tackled, but we are confident on the scientific background of our proposal. Thank you, Mr. Snaijev. Thank you.

[26:22]
How does the commission take into account geographical and hydrological difference between member states such as population dynasty and land use pressure and the fact of countries like the Netherlands are located at the downstream end of the river basins and does face disproportionate nutrients in flow from outside the borders.

[26:53]
Well, the Netherlands are active is largely based on economic conditions. So all this appraisal for the regulations or not as all Of course, of course, in the taking into account the geographical and the ecological situation and soil conditions at the member state or the region. But with this set in terms of density, yes, the Netherlands is a highly populated country.

[27:16]
So that's also a reason to take special attention to the negative consequences of excess nitrates, the risks for the cost for drinking water, the cost for the economy and so forth. But in terms of this getting nutrients from elsewhere, um Actually, the if we take the nitrogen cycle, the Netherlands is more an exporter than a receiver. You may get some from Flanders or Germany, but also they also get nutrients that originate in the Netherlands.

[27:44]
So, it's not it's not clear cut as the Netherlands being suffering from pollution from elsewhere. Much of it comes from within the country. Mr. Birck. Thanks. Next year, the Dutch farmers lost derogation.

[28:01]
What do you think? of the fact that farmers are now forced to dispose of animal manure at high costs and to bring bring in expensive artificial fertilizer fertilizers. And can you reflect on the development that animal manure as a nutrient is replaced by artificial fertilizer? Well, on the last part of the question, that's the renewal approach. It's of course ideal to put manure on land.

[28:31]
The issue is is on putting too much manure on land, it gets a problem. If you see if you mention a natural ecosystem with the wild herbivores, leaving manure in the soil, that's good for the soil, that's good for everything. But when it gets excessive, then the pollution goes into the water because it's not as a chemical fertilizer, it takes longer to degrade.

[28:51]
Um but of course I have all the empathy for farmers that face many pressures of several kinds, one of which have excess manure to deal with. But that's where when this current derogation was issued, it was let's say phasing out derogation with a set of measures that had been announced by the then government to help the farmers in that transition. Many of the those measures are either not accomplished or taken out.

[29:21]
So what you say is well farmers need support for the transition for sure. We have very much in favor for that, but that's something for the Dutch government to put in place.

[29:36]
In Holland we have quite a problem with the habitat directive 6.1 and 6.2. The quality of nature is not good enough of is decreasing and that gives a big problem and it gives a big problem with legalization of of farms eh how do you call it? Vergunningen eh Help me. emissions.

[30:03]
Um, and and because especially because of uh additional additionality from uh we can't use the the the the decreasing of uh uh emission for legalization of farms. And how do we solve that problem?

[30:22]
We are We don't know exactly how much uh lowering the emission we need to uh uh legalize Well, there's one way through which I don't think you would solve the problem which seems to be for some a temptation. If we have a problem with Natura 2000 site, why don't we take out the Natura 2000 site? We declassified Natura site, off goes the problem. First, the problem won't go away in terms of nitrogen.

[30:52]
And second, we do have quite some jurisprudence from the court of justice on what it takes to declassify Natura 2000 site. It requires a scientific error or an extreme phenomena that had destroyed the site itself not from human causes. Now, what you tell me is well, okay, but what to do then when there's a farm nearby that needs to act?

[31:14]
I would say if the firm cannot have a permit, cannot act in the same way as it did, it needs support to find a different different pathway. This is the essence of finding what measures can be brought in. What I don't think we can say, well, we don't need nature after all, do we? I do think we need nature including for the resilience of farming and part of it is the habitat corrective. Mem Mikoski.

[31:40]
Yeah, I was thinking about There are a new discussion again. If you could remind me of what exactly the conclusions were were about the necessities scientifically what you need to make renewable work in the sense of that it works good for nature, environment, climate and all that other things that European Union requires if you can remind me about that.

[32:10]
And I want to check if this scientific test is has the commission taken into account ehm public health, impacts on nature because when I think about it renew would not solve the problem of land use so what that agriculture does to to nature and the effects of that eh animal feed problems and the public health problems when it comes to people living in the neighborhood of intensive farms or manure processors which would be needed for massively for renewal.

[32:53]
Has that been taken into account when thinking about this? Well, I can tell you we certainly take into account when tabling a proposal anything related to such important aspects as public health nation and so forth. I don't have to admit the technicalities that the JRC said that renewal need to follow, but maybe I can explain this way. As I said, manure on the soil is is perfect, provided is not too much.

[33:17]
So, what's the advance relative advantage of a chemical fertilizer or and being chemical and simple, we know how quickly it can be absorbed by the plant, let's say by the crop. While manure takes time on the absorbed. What renew does on processing manure, it approaches it to the behavior of a chemical fertilizer and in that sense much quicker to be absorbed. So, there are some conditions which I don't have with me. Sorry to we can finish them later if at all.

[33:45]
But now the important is, and you're right, RENUERE is one tool is not a silver bullet. It will not solve the lack of land or the access to nitrogen and is just a tool that can help farmers with the proper conditions and investment. It requires some processing. It can be a piece of the toolkit that you may wish to use. Additional question? Let's go ahead. Yeah, because this is very important.

[34:10]
I mean, I understand it could be a tool, but it many analysts have been talking also about being a tool for a potential lock-in into a system which is overall damaging for all those uh goals that the European Union has when it comes to nature protecting and more welfare protecting public health. And if a new uh helps keeping that system of intensive farming which is negatively affecting our health etc.

[34:37]
All these goals, then it's not under the uh the lines when you sum up the positives and negatives negative sides, it could not be maybe a good tool. So I'm kind of looking at the integral integral um how do you say evaluation of how how effective would renewal would be, especially if you know that the farmers would have to invest a lot into this.

[35:05]
Is this really effective? Well, if the proposal is approved, it's not an obligation to use it. It will actually require a member states to transposing if they so wish. And not all member states seem very keen on using renewable. So it will of course also be up to the Netherlands to adopt it on it, but so far the what we hear from the Netherlands is as positive.

[35:28]
But although renewable can help as a way to avoid pollution from non-processed manure, it's so it does not solve wider issues of excess manure. Um the limits of land available being out reach and so forth. It's not for that. It's a tool to reduce the risks or impacts of using a manual. If you would just use it to keep intensifying, then that would solve nothing, but it's a tool that can help in our view.

[35:58]
Thank you. Ms. Naeff. Thank you. Can the commission clarify how it's intends to balance environmental objectives administrative borders and economic feasibility for farmers during the evaluation of the nitrate directive. At this stage, I'll have to repeat a bit. We'll pay a lot of attention to the cost issue.

[36:27]
the cost for farmers, administrations, and why the cost for society and all and also the benefits, the economic benefits of the directive itself. So at this stage, much at the essence of the evaluation is finding the balanced conclusions that can help decide what to do next in terms of the NATO directive, but it's work ongoing, so I don't have the final result yet to give you. Mr. Pirck? Thanks.

[36:56]
Just uh simple question. Uh, what would uh be better for the water quality, the soil, the um uh biodiversity uh when farmers animal use uh animal manure from their own livestock or when they used imported artificial uh fertilizer uh also in terms of our uh our climate goals?

[37:21]
Well, let me start by saying that on the years that I'm following environment, I will conclude that for In many activities, we have oversimplified ecosystems for the sake of one single goal, those three production. And when we oversimplify, we lose some benefits of this link between plants, animals, soil, and so forth. So, of course, it's much better if a farmer can plainly use animal manure instead of chemical fertilizers.

[37:49]
It's a what should be done, but if you have excess manure, you bring many other problems for the wider society for water for air, etc. As you are facing now. So, it's a matter of matching the availability of the land versus the number of animals and manure. That's why land-based systems will tap better from disadvantages of using manure when you have much more than what the land can absorb, then you need to find other approaches.

[38:22]
Yes, thank you, Mr. Chairman. We had the seventh action program. We agreed about quite a lot of issues. You told something about that. You're rather critical. Uh, uh, we we did not reach all the calls. It's a kind of understatement. Um, one of the issues was uh, uh, uh, about agreed is crown based farming. Uh, we are four years later now.

[38:52]
Until now the Netherlands had nothing done about that. How do you rate that? Well, I mentioned on the a couple at least a couple of measures that the seven section program that are stalled or not happening yet includes for instance reviewing the fertilization rates and one of them is this transition to land-based dairy farming that as you say doesn't seem to be happening.

[39:20]
So we do not say it might must happen. We say, if it doesn't happen, something else must happen in order to deal with a problem. And that's where our concerns are because it's not clear for us where that is. Actually, we have taken note of the results of this ministerial commission that your government has set out.

[39:45]
Um and also noted that on this package, it was your own prime minister that said that it's just a first step and more action is needed. So the the measures are not yet totally clear. Certainly more is needed. And it would look to us an interesting approach to go towards a land-based farming in the Netherlands. Thank you very much.

[40:10]
Yeah, according to EBS, the international biodiversity panel, we have we have a biodiversity crisis which is as worse as as big as the climate crisis.

[40:23]
I was wondering how will the commission this take this into account when uh uh revising the nitrogen uh directive and now making sure that we book some good results when it comes to water quality and biodiversity uh protection. I was wondering how the commission will take that into account.

[40:48]
Well, first you're totally right that we are facing a biodiversity crisis, a climate crisis, a pollution crisis or as I like to call it a global sustainability crisis that cannot go on. And that's very much the action that we have had in the commission and are still having those we under the green deal that has brought let's say next to climate change the rest of the environment as having the same relevance.

[41:12]
Now the nitrates are actually just a small piece but an important one and the evaluation certainly is not there to reduce environmental protection. So we will look into how far it went in ensuring protection what else may be needed and that will be one of the contribution blocks for pollution, biodiversity loss and climate change, we hope. Thank you. Ms. Nayef. Thank you.

[41:38]
How does the European Commission ensure that member states are retain sufficient uh flexibility within the uh nitrate detective uh directive to account for national and uh regional specific um specific uh specific uh while maintaining in level playing field across the EU.

[42:06]
Well, I can ensure with the member states themselves are very keen on using the right level of flexibility adapting to their territory. But for instance whenever a member state sees conditions to request a derogation, we of course analyze the situation as proposed, the measures proposed.

[42:23]
We take it to the United Committee where the other member states also need to be convinced and when things seem to not cause a problem for water quality and wider objectives directive, it is approved. So the flexibility is very much inherent to the Thank you, Mr. Pirck. Thanks. Mr.

[42:48]
Delgado tell us that the agriculture is very innovative very agriculture power high very nice to her. But a part of the menu in the Netherlands we use for production of energy. That's one of the innovations are in potential very successful.

[43:12]
Can can you reflect on this possibility to use manure for the Netherlands and in the other countries from the EU? Yeah, manure is used in some countries on including Denmark also for instance to produce biogas and absolutely nothing against that's a fair use of it. Then what you need to take into account that there is a so-called digestate that also needs to have a destiny and can be in self-pollutant.

[43:39]
It may need also some processing before being ready to get back to the soil. But it's one again one of the possible tools in the toolkit on what to do with manure. Mr. Holman. Yeah, we uh want to bring down the amount of cows that pick sometimes uh and then we have a government by out program.

[44:05]
And the problem with that is sometimes the state aid rules of the EU. Uh, I would ask you, is it possible you can really help us to be not too critical on that and to agree with our buy out programs organized by the government.

[44:30]
Well, honestly, I think we have proven that at least four times because we have never brought obstacles to Dutch state aid to solve these problems as As far as I'm informed, we have been very flexible as commission. Yeah, but we are are now trying to make a deal about an extensifying uh uh program and there's quite a lot of discussion and it takes months to agree.

[44:55]
Okay, at the end we agree, but we would like to do it uh quicker and uh in an issue way. Let's say without discussion we cannot promise anything. We do need to assess in any case, but we do look into it with all the approach to help the Netherlands on putting forward the measures that makes sense to solve the issue. State aid is one of the tools again. Thank you. Member Kostić.

[45:23]
Well, I would just like to um state that our the Netherlands has not been the best partner in this. And we have not been doing our homework. So I think the commission has been too flexible on us, but that's my political view. Um, I was just wondering uh Uh, one of the issues is when it comes to water quality nature goals that we have is monitoring transparency and enforcement.

[45:50]
Uh, we see this issue in the Netherlands by the time it's sure it's also an European wide issue. How is the European Commission thinking about um improving this and are there some more resources involved for the member states for this? Well, said my and need to give a general answer. We are very much aware nowadays first, on the issue of the need to simplify while still allowing for the ambition level we need. At the same time, technology is developing.

[46:17]
There's a lot of tools from drones towards observation, etc. that on several policy fields help us and help the member states monitor. So, we'll have that into account including on some proposals we are discussing with the co-legislators on soil monitoring on forest monitoring and so forth. So, we are aware of the need for solid data And to need to get them as simply as clear as we can.

[46:56]
Yeah, question about arable farming. How do you rate a potential problem about plant protection products and intensive crops? The arable farming in in the Netherlands is quite intensive. Is that a problem or are you saying it's well and go on? No, I'm not referring to the situation in the Netherlands. I'm not aware of it specifically, but of course that plant protection products can bring pollution, diffuse pollution.

[47:25]
When we say that on water diffuse pollution, I don't refer only to nitrates, pesticides is also an issue. So everywhere we should reduce the use on risk of pesticides and replace by safer alternatives as far as possible.

[47:42]
Yeah, for example, glyphosate round up, we have is an issue and uh it's it's judged by eh, European eh, organization dealing with that. Eh, we rated as a a difficult discussion and to make good policy on that. How are you looking to that? Well, that goes a bit beyond my remit, the analysis of glyphosate and its impact.

[48:12]
So, if you don't mind, I will not delve much into that. Yeah, thank you. You can try you can try but it's okay. Member Kostić, do you have any more?

[48:24]
Yeah, on the issue of transparency, at least in the Netherlands, we've been struggling with example the fact that citizens journalists but even scientists are having trouble accessing exact data emission data even numbers of animals at farms. Um, this we have a transparency problem.

[48:51]
Um, How does does does the European Commission have this in mind and does it plan to take steps into increasing their transparency? So everybody knows what's actually being emitted in their neighborhood? Well, I tell you in terms of documents available to commission decisions so forth, we are very much transparent in the sense that we have very clear rules on access to documents.

[49:18]
That does equate quite some some working hours of my colleagues to apply, they come very often. I cannot delve into one how the member state X or Z deals with access to documents, but wherever we have the the rule of law, there's also the national course to sort out any undue lack of transparency. But from the commission's side, full transparency is our policy. Thank you. Mr. Halman.

[49:45]
Yeah, in Europe we are talking about the food security. Uh, and how can we balance food security with sustainability and quality of nature. It's competitive in a certain way from how do we deal with that and how how can we organize it in a good way? I would say how could we otherwise? I mean with no nature we have no food point.

[50:13]
Food is not a human production is a nature production mediated by humans be it fishers, farmers and so forth. If we do do it in a way in which we degrade the soil, nature, etc. We'll have no future no food in the future. When I say nowadays it's already one challenge for food security, climate change, extreme weather events, pollution later loss, biodiversity loss, soil degradation and so forth.

[50:38]
So that's precisely to ensure food security that we need some pieces of legislation not address nature including the nature restoration and regulation that was wrongly perceived as standing in way of food security when it's exactly the contrary. is to ensure that food production can continue sustainably. Thank you. Member Kostic, do you have any more questions?

[51:02]
Um, from a lot of research we know that the transition to a more plant-based system, obviously the more organic the better um, is uh a plus for many of the goals that we have when it comes to biodiversity, for it comes to food security, when it comes to climate, etcetera, etcetera.

[51:20]
I was wondering what um measures and capacity does the European Commission have to give to farmers which are willing to switch to that those kind of systems. You mean switching from livestock to plant-based. I don't think we have a policy that orient the the farmers directly to one option or the other.

[51:46]
That's very much in national capacity on the common agricultural policy, the the strategic plans from the from the cap. But if I remember well, uh the one angle that was in the farm to fork strategy is there's an advantage on going more towards plant-based diets which do part of everything that we eat.

[52:05]
And there are some advantages indeed in increasing the consumption of plants in that sense, but I don't think we are pushing farmers to go to into one more production or another. That's something for national policy. Additional question? Yeah, I was referring to that policy of green protein let's say transition which was included in in the European policy. I'm not saying that you should force farmers.

[52:35]
I'm saying that because the the benefits are so clear that for the farmers willing to do that are there instruments is there money from the European Commission which can make it easier?

[52:53]
Member States can devise the eco schemes they want for instance or the rural development measures tuned towards that. So there's no lack of funding. What we need is Ok, Mr. Holland.

[53:10]
In Europe is it the concern that we have enough water for drinking and of a good quality and do you pay enough attention to that issue to come not in a situation that we really have a big problem in 5 years time? Well, I think one of the good things are being in the is that normally you can open a tap and drink the water without much concerns.

[53:40]
But it can cost quite some money to ensure the quality is right. For instance, if you have heavily polluted water from nitrates, water companies often come to us and complain on what the cost and fair cost comes into them.

[53:54]
So, that's why let's say we don't have as an issue of drinking water in the EU, but the water resilience strategy is there because the challenges for the wider users of water, from drinking to energy, to agriculture, the challenges are there, both from quality and quantity, including from climate change.

[54:13]
So we need actually to restore the water cycles that was sometimes disrupted, including by this management of nature to ensure we'll have good water for a long time. And will uh climate change affected, especially the southern part of Europe, will it have a big influence? For for uh uh farming? Well, we all know where the climate change makes things more irregular.

[54:41]
So we have sometimes excess rain, sometimes a drought. We are facing that in the south, including in my country, quite quite some droughts, but this winter more water than elsewhere in Europe. So this instability is there and that's all about adaptation to climate change. We need to find the right ways to well change crops, be efficient, uh find alternative uses and ensure that we have the quality.

[55:07]
That's the essence of water resilience, which is very much linked to climate change adaptation indeed. Okay, are there any more questions? You can You can go. You can No, you can stay of course, but do we have any questions anymore? Mr. Pierrick, Mr. Holman, Mr. Pierrick. Well, a last question maybe.

[55:32]
Um, in the nature of for all the countries in the Europe. Maybe that's not a logic norm because the in the Netherlands we have a very very high production from many crops and there is much more than in Spain and in in in in other EU countries.

[55:59]
How can you That norm was established with scientific criteria as a general rule for what's the normal amount that will cause no problem.

[56:23]
So it's a kind of a limit that is some general assurance of not getting into pollution. But due thanks to the inherent flexibility of the directive that precisely where member states can come and explain my grass land, my soil, my whatever can cope with a greater amount. That's evaluated by the commission, by the United Committee and if prove the concept derogations are issued.

[56:47]
So it remains a valid limit um and but it can be extended and I don't think it would be logical to use our term to just increase it like that as a solution for current pressures. Thank you. Any more questions, Mr. Hoffman? No, I don't have any more questions. I want to thank Mr. Doca Rosa for the clear answers and maybe he has at last a good advice for us.

[57:17]
But that's up to you. Mr. Delgado Rosa. Well, I would have two two uh one is more immediate. There is quite some urgency or tackling your nitrates and nitrates and issues. So, whatever you devise as policy, choose things that deliver results quickly. That's just a general simple message and not long-term plans that might in some years give some results. That will not solve the problem.

[57:46]
The second aspect is returning to my main key words of the beginning. This doesn't go with arm twisting between sectors. It only goes with consensus, convergence, and we have shown it's possible to get to convergence. So, I think it's a good idea to sit again all major parties and stakeholders, farmers, business, industry, water companies, NGOs, etc.

[58:10]
and advise what you normally know how to do, which is finding a good consensus among the Dutch society. That would be very One last question. Well, it triggered me because that's good advice and it seems contradictory to me because you the first one was do take measures that are quick. And the second advice was look for that consensus.

[58:35]
The thing is that the consensus we have been trying to do for some decades uh didn't quite work out for the Netherlands at least uh on this point. Um so Searching for more consensus with all these parties that you mentioned will take more times, maybe more decades. So how do you see this? Maybe you need a mix when I say urgency, I mean it, you need quick measures.

[59:02]
So even if some players would not be too happy with whatever measures, they will likely need to be taken anyway and after that you see people around, you don't necessarily take decades, you do take some time on dialogue. But you know, the structure to be very on the strategic dialogue in agriculture. I was not counting with consensus and after some months consensus emerge. So that was for me a high opener.

[59:26]
Now in the report if you want to read it, they will be saying that some stakeholders like less, others like more but they cannot live with it. That's what you need. It's not rosy for everyone but acceptable for everyone. Thank you very much. That brings us to the end of this discussion. I would like to thank everyone for the presence here in the room and as well In particular extend gratitude to Mr.

[59:53]
Delgado Rose and his team for the presence here and for tonight's engaging in discussion. With this I hereby close this meeting and wish you all pleasant evening. Thank you and goodbye.